If you can have $B = C[B]$ as a type in your language, that means it is a solution to $\mu X . C[X]$, and you can talk about $\text{fold}_B$ and $\text{unfold}_B$ for that type.

This can become important in the implementation as term information can be encoded in those folds and unfolds.

# Intersection Type Assignment

Intersection types are a way to allow more than one type for a variable. It is a relatively light extension, but with a lot of implications.

Let's add a type connector, $\cap$.

Our type language now becomes:
$$A, B ::= \varphi\ |\ A \to B\ |\ A \cap B\ (\cap \text{ binds stronger than} \to)$$
... this does however, add some extra complexities like the transformation:
$$(A \to B) \cap (A \to C) \sim A \to (B \cap C)$$
Let's try a different syntax which is a bit more complex, but makes other things less annoying:
$$\begin{align*}
    (\text{Strict})\ A, B &::= \varphi\ |\ \sigma \to B\ \\
    (\text{Intersection})\ \sigma, \tau &::= A_1 \cap \dots \cap A_n\ (n \geq 1)\ |\ \top\ (\text{A } 0 \text{ type intersection, i.e. the Universal Type})
\end{align*}$$
Note that every other type is a subtype of $\top$, so it is a way of signifying that you aren't interested in that type. Our type assignment rules change as follows:
$$(A x): \dfrac{}{\Gamma, x : \cap_n A_i \vdash A_j}\ (1 \leq j \leq n)$$
$$(\to I): \dfrac{\Gamma, x : \sigma \vdash M : B}{\Gamma \vdash \lambda x . M : \sigma \to B}$$
$$(\to E): \dfrac{\Gamma \vdash M : \sigma \to A \hspace{2em} \Gamma \vdash N : \sigma}{\Gamma \vdash M N : A}$$
$$(\cap I): \dfrac{\Gamma \vdash M : A_1 \cdots \vdash M : A_n}{\Gamma \vdash M : A_1 \cap \dots \cap A_n}\ (n \geq 0)$$
Again, we can type self-application with it:
$$\dfrac{
    \dfrac{
        \dfrac{}{\Gamma \vdash x : A \to B}\ (A x)
        \hspace{2em}
        \dfrac{}{\Gamma \vdash x : A}\ (A x)
    }{
        \Gamma = x : (A \to B) \cap A \vdash xx : B
    }\ (\cap I)
}{
    \vdash \lambda x . x x : ((A \to B) \cap A) \to B
}\ (\to E)$$
Another, uninteresting way to type self-application is:
$$\dfrac{}{\vdash \lambda x . x x : \top}\ (A x)$$
Which may sometimes comes in handy.

So what if we want to type $(\lambda x y z . x z (y z)) (\lambda a b . a)$, in Curry's system we'll get $(B \to A) \to B \to B$. With intersection types, let's make the $yz$ in the first abstraction body have a type $\top$. Now:
- The outside $z : A$.
- The outside $x : (A \to \top \to A) \to \top \to A \to A$.
- The second abstraction has type $A \to \top \to A$.
Therefore our overall type is $\top \to A \to A$... and we can substitute the $\top$ on the final result (and the $\top$ on the outside of the brackets on the type of the outside $x$) with whatever.

**Note**: we can show that type assignment is closed under beta-equality, and that's what makes it undecidable:
$$\dfrac{\Gamma \vdash M : A \hspace{2em} M =_\beta N}{\Gamma \vdash N : A}$$
This rule does have a very convoluted proof involving the subject reduction theorem, the substitution lemma, and a lot of sub-proofs.

With intersection types... let's try typing self-application applied to itself:
$$(\lambda x . x x)(\lambda x . x x)$$
- $\text{unify } ((1 \to 2) \cap 1 \to 2)\ (((3 \to 4) \cap 3 \to 4) \to 5)$.
- $\text{unify } ((1 \to 2) \cap 1)\ ((3 \to 4) \cap 3 \to 4)$.
    - The $\cap 3$ can be split into:
        - $(5 \to 6) \cap 5 \to 6$.
        - $(7 \to 8) \cap 7 \to 8$.
    - And these can be intersected together to form the final right hand side type of:
        - $((5 \to 6) \cap 5 \to 6) \cap ((7 \to 8) \cap 7 \to 8)$.
- $\text{unify } 1 ((7 \to 8) \cap 7 \to 8)$... is trivial.
- $\text{unify } (((7 \to 8) \cap 7 \to 8) \to 2)\ ((5 \to 6) \cap 5 \to 6)$.

Oops, it has looped (we're unifying the same structures as our first step, since unification is commutative). Typing intersection types may fail or loop indefinitely... and that's despite the fact that intersection types are finite.

To say something is typeable in this system is to ask for a type for a term that is ***not*** $\top$... since $\top$ is a trivial supertype of everything. Usually this means that the term has a HNF:
$$\Gamma \vdash M : A\ (A \neq \top) \iff M\ \text{has a HNF}$$
And if a term always normalises (strongly normalises):
$$\Gamma \vdash M : A\ (\top \not \in \Gamma, A) \iff M\ \text{is Strongly Normalisable}$$
You can also prove that "computability $\iff$ reducibility". It isn't difficult but it takes quite a strange and unexpected route.
