Let us try to express lists.

We could say it's a pair of an element, and a list, or an empty list constant. So how do we bake this into types (as this is a recursive definition)?

So what is a pair?

We can express it as a polytype of $A \times B$, and we can express disjoint choice using $A + B$.

Let's make some assignment rules for it, in the context of $ML$ (but you can really use it on any other system if you want).

Note that $\left< E_1, E_2 \right>$, $\text{Right}(E)$, and $\text{Left}(E)$ are terms.
$$\dfrac{
    \Gamma \vdash E_1 : A
    \hspace{2em}
    \Gamma \vdash E_2 : B
}{
    \Gamma \vdash \left< E_1, E_2 \right> : A \times B
}$$
$$\dfrac{
    \Gamma \vdash E : A \times B
}{
    \Gamma \vdash \text{Right}(E) : B
}
\text{ and }
\dfrac{
    \Gamma \vdash E : A \times B
}{
    \Gamma \vdash \text{Left}(E) : A
}$$
We also need some reduction rules for these new constructs:
$$\begin{align*}
    \text{Left}(\left< E_1, E_2 \right>) &\to E_1 \\
    \text{Right}(\left< E_1, E_2 \right>) &\to E_2
\end{align*}$$
We also need some contextual rules, allowing you to run the contents of a pair.

In our case, $\text{Left}$ and $\text{Right}$ are functions. It is only when they are applied to an expression that the overall thing becomes a term.

Polytypes ($\times$) will let us build pairs and lists.

Choice / or-types are a little harder... let's borrow or-introduction from logic:
$$
\dfrac{
    \Gamma \vdash E : A
}{
    \Gamma \vdash \text{inj. }\mathcal{l}\left< E \right> : A + B
}
\text{ and }
\dfrac{
    \Gamma \vdash E : B
}{
    \Gamma \vdash \text{inj. }\mathcal{r}\left< E \right> : A + B
}
$$
What about using these types? Let's borrow from logic again with or-elimination:
$$\dfrac{
    \Gamma \vdash E : A + B
    \hspace{2em}
    \Gamma \vdash E_1 : A \dashv C
    \hspace{2em}
    \Gamma \vdash E_2 : B \dashv C
}{
    \Gamma \vdash \text{case}(E, E_1, E_2) : C
}$$
$\text{case}$ is another new term, just like the previous terms and injections (which are also terms).

The reduction of a case is as follows:
$$\begin{align*}
    \text{case}(\text{inj. } l, E_1, E_2) &\to E_1E \\
    \text{case}(\text{inj. } r, E_1, E_2) &\to E_2E
\end{align*}$$
Note that $E_1$ and $E_2$ are abstractions.

There is also **no** associativity in this. Nested choices or polytypes must be explicitly bracketed to show which way around it is.

We now need to deal with recursive types. Let's try:
$$A, B ::= \varphi\ |\ A \dashv B\ |\ A + B\ |\ A \times B\ |\ X\ |\ \mu X . A$$

So for our lists, we can do something like $\text{list num} = (\ ) + (\text{num} \times \text{list num})$, and we can use $\mu$-equality to express it as $\mu X . (\ ) + (\text{num} \times X)$.

$\mu$-conversion is expressed as: $\mu X . A =_\mu A [\mu X . A / X]$, and $=_\mu$ is the smallest congruence relation on types that contains $=_\mu$-steps:
$$\dfrac{
    \Gamma \vdash E : A
}{
    \Gamma \vdash E : B
}\ (A =_\mu B)$$
If we express these recursive types as trees, two recursive types are $=_\mu$ equivalent if unfolding their infinite tree of types yield coinciding trees. Infinite unfolding is undefined.
