Let's go back to why Mycroft's alteration to $\mathcal{W}$ to allow polymorphic recursion is undecidable:
$$\dfrac{\Gamma, f : \sigma \vdash E : \sigma}{\Gamma \vdash \text{fix}\ f. E : \sigma}$$
Take the expression $\text{fix}\ f. C [f(\lambda x . x), f(\lambda a b . a b)] : F$.

We'd have something like:
$$\begin{align*}
    \forall \varphi . \varphi \implies f &: \varphi \\
    f (\lambda x . x) &: \varphi' \mapsto (A \to A) \to B \\
    f (\lambda a b . ab) &: \varphi'' \mapsto ((C \to D) \to C \to D) \to E
    \\
    \text{Then } \sigma &= \text{closure of } F \dots \\
    (A \to A) \to B \text{ and } ((C \to D) \to C \to D) \to E &\text{ are instances of } F
\end{align*}$$
Well, in this case it works and gives the type $F  = (\varphi''' \to \varphi''') \to \varphi''''$... but it won't work all the time.

Let's try with $\text{fix } g . \lambda x . g$ instead.
$$\begin{align*}
    g &: \varphi \\
    \lambda x . g &: \varphi' \to \varphi \\
    S &: \forall \varphi \varphi' . \varphi' \to \varphi \\
    \sigma &= \varphi \varphi' . \varphi' \to \varphi \\
    \lambda x . g &: 4 \to 3 \to 2 \\
    \sigma &= \forall 4\ 3\ 2 . 4 \to 3 \to 2\\
    \cdots
\end{align*}$$
Well, that starts to diverge. Hence Mycroft's system is undecidable.

# Term Rewriting, Revisited

We have our replacement rules: $lhs \to rhs$.
We have our terms: $terms ::= x\ |\ t_1t_2\ |\ F$.

Replacement R is a mapping from variables to terms.

Rewrite rules ($lhs^R \to rhs^R$) are closed for contexts.

Patterns are written on the left hand side as $lhs : \mathbf{F}\ t_1 \dots t_n$, where $\mathbf{F}$ is a defined symbol.

Here's an example:
$$\begin{align*}
    \mathbf{I}\ x &\to x \\
    \mathbf{I}\ y &\to t \\
    R &: x \mapsto t
\end{align*}$$
$$\begin{align*}
    \mathbf{I}\ x &\to x \\
    \mathbf{J}\ x &\to x \\
    \mathbf{H}\ (\mathbf{K}\ x) &\to \mathbf{I} \\
    \mathbf{H}\ y &\to y
\end{align*}$$
Term rewriting is not always confluent. A rewriting system is confluent if it is *left-linear* (no duplicate variables in an $lhs$) and has *no critical pairs* (which implies there is a total order which pairs of patterns operating on the same symbol will execute in), though that is a sufficient condition and not a necessary condition. You can define confluent rewriting systems that violate one or more of those properties.

Haskell's internal term-rewriting mechanism does satisfy the sufficient conditions for confluence, with some extra safety mechanisms so the compiler doesn't endlessly type-check.

So when is a rule typeable? Well, it is when:
$$\begin{align*}
    \mathbf{F}\ p_1,\dots,p_n &\to rhs \\
    p_1 &: A_1 \\
    \dots\\
    p_n &: A_n \\
    rhs &: B \\
    \text{where } \Gamma &\vdash \mathbf{F}\ p_1,\dots,p_n : B \\
    \Gamma &\vdash rhs :B
\end{align*}$$
Right? Not quite. Here is an example where it *doesn't* work:
$$\begin{align*}
    \mathbf{M}\ (\mathbf{S}\ x\ y) &\to \mathbf{S\ I}\ y : ((7 \to 8) \to 9) \to (7 \to 8) \to 8 \\
    \Gamma = x &: (1 \to 2) \to 1 \to 3 \\
    y &: (1 \to 2) \to 1
\end{align*}$$

But what if we write $\mathbf{M}\ (\mathbf{S\ K\ I})$? well, if you write this type out, it diverges. Something has gone wrong with our optimistic approach:
$$\begin{align*}
    \mathbf{M}\ (\mathbf{S\ K\ I}) &\to \mathbf{S\ I\ I} \\
    \text{where } \mathbf{M}\ (\mathbf{S}\ x\ y)\ &\text{alone says}\\
    x &: (1 \to 2) \to 4 \to 3\ [3 / \mathtt{(1 \to 2)}] \\
    y &: (1 \to 2) \to 4\ [4 / \mathtt{(1 \to 2)}]
\end{align*}$$
Uh oh, we've now gotten into an awkward situation where the type for the $lhs$ doesn't match the $rhs$ (because we've put a $\varphi \to \varphi$ function into a $\varphi' \to \varphi' \to \varphi''$-shaped hole).

So how does Haskell do it? Or, at least, how do we fix this?

We have, essentially: $lhs^R \to rhs^R$, so we have $\Gamma \vdash lhs^R : A$, which means there should be $\Gamma' \vdash lhs : A\ \text{where}\ x : B \in \Gamma' \implies x^R : B\ \text{inside}\ lhs^R : A$.

If we can show that last part, and from that, we can show that $\Gamma' \vdash rhs : A$, and from that and everything else, we have $\Gamma \vdash rhs^R : A$, then everything is okay.

So... how do we get $\Gamma' \vdash lhs : A \implies \Gamma' \vdash rhs : A$? We need some principal types ($P$) and contexts ($\Pi$), such that $\Pi \vdash lhs : P \implies \Pi \vdash rhs : P$ when $pp\ lhs = \left< \Pi; P \right>$.

That means that $lhs \to rhs$ is typeable if $pp\ \mathcal{E}\ lhs = \left< \Pi; P \right> \implies \Pi \vdash rhs : P$. Performing $pp$ on $lhs$ chooses our environment for our rewrite rule ($\mathcal{E}\mathbf{F}$, where $\mathbf{F}$ is our rewrite rule symbol).

### $\rho$-calculus

This is essentially just $\lambda$-calculus with patterns. We could have done all this rewriting and pattern matching in this.

### Haskell

It... doesn't encounter this problem. That is because it uses a function-constructor system (functions can only match against datatype constructors), where you can show all the functions you define satisfy that property above, where there is also a safety statement that guarantees typeability on a function that is using pattern-matching.

### Going back to term rewriting...

Why should we allow systems that don't use function constructors? They have quite a bit more power than systems strictly confined to function constructors. For example:

```
num ::= 0 | Succ num | Pred num

-- The language treated these as laws, and not functions.
-- ... well, laws being "optimisation laws".
Succ(Pred num) -> num
Pred(Succ num) -> num
```

This is allowed in a language called Miranda (at least, until release 3), but Haskell rejects this as `Succ` and `Pred` appear in both the function and constructor positions.

You also cannot get surjective pairing while maintaining confluence, like:

```
Left  (Pair (a, b))     -> a
Right (Pair (a, b))     -> b
Pair  (Left x, Right x) -> x
```

... this isn't confluent. If we tried adding this to $\Lambda$, we get something that is no longer confluent like normal $\Lambda$. We can still keep these around though for term rewriting.

We can, however, work with explicit substitution!
$$\begin{align*}
    \text{Appl}\ (\text{Abst}\ (\text{Var}\ x)\ M)\ N &\to \text{Subst}\ M\ x\ N \\
    \text{Subst} &\cdots
\end{align*}$$
