# RAII: Resource Acquisition Is Initialization

Also known as:

- Constuctor Acquires, Destructor Releases
- Scope-based Resource Management (... on stack-allocated data)

This is a very widely used pattern for resource management in C++, which encourages thinking about ownership and lifetimes of objects.

`std::unique_ptr<T>` is a very good example.

We will go over this again!

# Race Conditions and Data Races

You can have two unordered accesses to memory where the execution of the program can vary due to what happens at runtime.

- You can have a write-read race condition, where one thread tries to store to `x`, while another tries to read off `x`.
- You can also have a write-write race condition, where two threads try to store to `x`. What is finally stored in `x` is now non-deterministic.
- Note that two or more simultaneous reads is not a race condition. It is perfectly safe.

Race conditions are a key part of concurrent programming:

- Who gets the last ticket to the show?
- Who hits whom first (e.g. in some game)?
- Which process gets to write to the file?
- Which thread acquires the mutex?

However, race conditions should be intentional... and used to avoid data races.

## Data Races in C++

A data race is an unintentional race condition:

- Distinct threads *access* the same memory location...
- At least one access is a *write*...
- At least one access is *non-atomic*...
- ... and the accesses are *not ordered* by synchronisation.

If all holds, we have a data race. It now means the behaviour of a C++ program on some input is undefined if a data race can occur if the program is executed on that input.

This does not mean "the behaviour depends on the outcome of the race".

It means the program is allowed to do anything.

Remember, undefined behaviour is quite literally undefined. It has no bounds on what it can or can't do. The respective standards for C and C++ do not impose any requirements. **It may even do exactly what you want it to do, which is extremely dangerous, as this means you cannot even tell that undefined behaviour is occurring.**

Optimisation that assumes no UB is:

- Sound when there is no UB in the program.
- Sound when there *is* UB in the program, because in that case, **anything goes**.

# ThreadSanitizer

There is an automatic dynamic detection of data races available in `clang++` and `g++`, with the `-fsanitize=thread` flag, along with `-g` to get line numbers and debug symbols.

# Data Race vs. Race Condition

Remember: race conditions should be *intentional*. Mutexes and atomics are good ways to control race conditions and avoid data races (which are always bugs).

Data races are value-oblivious. A write-write data race is still a data race even if the value written by both threads are the same, or even the same value was already present to begin with when one thread writes the same value, and another tries to read.

## std::unique_lock vs std::scoped_lock

`std::scoped_lock`:
- Constructed with one or more mutexes
- Locks all mutexes on construction
- Unlocks all mutexes on destruction

Does not support:
- Deferred locking, where you delay locking until after construction
- Early unlocking, where you unlock before its destruction
- Ownership transfer, where you use `std::move` to change who owns the associated mutexes

`std::unique_lock` offers a moveable scoped lock, sort of like `std::unique_ptr`:
- Constructed with one mutex
- Locks mutex on construction... or deferred until later
- Allows unlocking and relocking
- Unlocks mutex upon destruction if still locked
- Supports transfer of ownership to a distinct unique owner via `std::move`

However, it does not support management of multiple mutexes. `std::scoped_lock` is also more efficient in general, so use it if `std::unique_lock` is not required.

# Condition Variables

Use `std::condition_variable` to allow threads to wait on one another. It lives in the `<condition_variable>` header file.

Use `.notify_one()` to wake up one waiting thread, and use `.notify_all()` to wake up all waiting threads.

To wait on a condition variable, associate a mutex with a condition variable, acquire the mutex via `std::unique_lock`, call `.wait()`, passing the lock and a **predicate** (usually a nullary lambda).

## What does `.wait()` do?

It requires that the lock is held by the thread that calls it, and repeats the following:
- Return if the predicate holds
- Releases the lock
- Blocks until another thread signals it (via `.notify_one()` or `.notify_all()`)
- Keep attempting to reacquire the lock, then repeats

We can now do the bounded FIFO queue example.
