## The """smart""" Futex-Mutex

This mutex will have a state machine embedded inside, with three states:
- `0`: mutex is available to be locked
- `1`: mutex is locked, and the owner doesn't think there are waiters
- `2`: mutex is locked, and the owner thinks there are waiters

(Note that any three consecutive values will work.)

To lock this mutex, we CMPXCHG the state with `0`, setting it to `1` on success. If that CMPXCHG succeeds, then we hold the lock, and we don't yet think there are waiters.

If it fails, that means the state is `1` or `2`. We do another CMPXCHG to try to atomically change the state to `2` (from `1`), then call `FUTEX_WAIT` with value `2`.

If the second CEX fails, then either:
- State was already `2`. The thread should join the waiters.
- State is changed to `0` before CMPXCHG... `FUTEX_WAIT` on `2` will return immediately, as the mutex is free. In this case, attempt to CMPXCHG to `2`, with the expected old value of `0`.
    - If that succeeds, then we get the lock, and also record that the attempt was a fight.
    - Otherwise, we bypass that with a `goto` and wait.

To unlock, the state is either `2` or `1`:
- If `2`: there are probably waiters, and we should call `FUTEX_WAKE`.
- If `1`: there are probably no waiters, and calling `FUTEX_WAKE` will most likely be wasteful.

To encode this behaviour, we call `FUTEX_WAIT` based on the old value of the state after atomically decrementing it (with `fetch_sub` or similar). Either way, we must ensure that the state is `0` when unlock returns.

Optimisations:
- After failing to get the mutex, we don't try to CMPXCHG the state from `1` to `2` if it is already `2`.
- If that CMHXCHG reveals that the state has become `0`... attempt to get the lock without waiting using `FUTEX_WAIT`!

Again, we will assume the lock is being used correctly, and will not account for improper use (e.g. unlocking when free, etc.).

Note: check the walkthrough, and *scrutinise the algorithm carefully* to see that there is no scenario where a waiter can get stuck waiting forever... unless the thread currently holding the lock crashes or something.

It is possible to get a lock which combines the back-off spin lock principles with these futexes in order to get the best of both worlds of having the good low-contention properties of spin locks, and the good high-contention properties of OS-locks.

# Concurrency in Haskell

Let's brush-up our monads and transformers, because we're going functional!

Despite Haskell being so fundamentally different to C++, the principles of concurrency is still the same, due to concurrency being inherently imperative.

Note that this is different to Parallel Haskell. This is instead a facility for making deterministic functional programs that take the full advantage of multithreading.

In Haskell, `MVar` is the key building block of concurrency (**M**utable **V**ariable). It is a mixture of:
- Shared-memory concurrency
- Message-passing concurrency

We'll be working with the `IO` monad extensively. A lot of code here will look pretty imperative.

Note that you can still execute pure functions inside `IO`. Just that the whole computation is considered side-effecting.

Another note that in GHC, you need the `-threaded` flag to enable the Runtime System's multithreading functionality, and `+RTS -N` is required to be passed to the program you compile.

To start a thread, we need `forkIO :: IO () -> IO ThreadId`. This starts a thread with some given `IO` action. These threads are *not* implicitly joined, so if the program exits while these are running, these threads are just killed off.

In order to wait for a thread to finish, or to get a result from a thread when joined, that's when we have `MVar` to the rescue.

`MVar`s are either empty (nothing's in there... no, not `Nothing`), or full (there is some value in there):
- We can create them with `newMVar` to create one with a value.
- We can create an empty `MVar` with `newEmptyMVar`.
- We can read from them with `readMVar`.
- We can take the value from them (which leaves them empty) with `takeMVar`.
- We can put values in them with `putMVar`.

However, `takeMVar` and `putMVar` have special properties:
- If the `MVar` is full, `putMVar` blocks until it is empty.
- If the `MVar` is empty, `takeMVar` blocks until it is full (Note: `readMVar` also blocks until full).

This means we can use these for synchronisation! Just, be careful though. They are *not* atomic.

`MVar ()` is pretty useful to use as a thread handle. You can combine this with `forkFinally` to create threads which the parent wait for. You could also manually set the handles in the end of the thread's action.

In both cases, the parent thread should try and take from the handle `MVar`s when it wants to "join" a thread.

The `()` parameter for `MVar` can be substituted for whatever you want to collect results from a thread.

Remember how we can use them for synchronisation? We can use them for mutual exclusion too. An empty `MVar` can act as a mutex. Putting something in the `MVar` is locking it, taking something from it is unlocking... or the other way around, it's also perfectly valid.

They are still susceptible to deadlocks, just like mutexes. Note that the Haskell Runtime System has some simple deadlock detection. It doesn't catch all of them, but it tries its best.

`MVar`s are also great for acting as single-item buffers. These are great for acting as condition variables too, as the act of putting / taking can do the blocking for us.

This is hiding the complexity of implementing the condition variables ourselves.

`MVar`s are backed my mutexes. `IORef`, normally used for plain mutable variables, provides some atomic accessor functions.
